---
draft: false
date: 2024-04-08
categories:
    - "About us"
authors:
    - jkoblitz
tags: [intro, OSIRIS, storytime]
---

# Why we developed OSIRIS

> A short story about the development of OSIRIS

It started with a problem. Isn't it usually like that? It's actually a very simple and quite common problem. I think it's the same in many companies and institutes: some processes have not yet arrived in the digital age. It was no different for us, especially the management of literature and scientific activities was based on complicated Excel and EndNote-based processes until 2022. In particular, the Excel lists sent around once a quarter, which were used by the researchers to query all activities carried out, did not arouse any enthusiasm on either side. The controlling department, which had to prepare the tables, send them around and collate them, found them just as dreadful as the researchers who had to fill them in.

<!-- more -->

As a scientist, I experienced this from both sides: I myself had to enter my publications, presentations, reviews, posters, etc. into the hated spreadsheet once a quarter and my husband, who is responsible for controlling, complained about the spreadsheets and the endless manual work. Understandable, because the returned tables had to be merged manually somehow. If anything was sent back at all.


As I work a lot in the field of digitalisation myself and know a lot about user interfaces, web development and automation, I always thought to myself: "There must be an easier way to do this." But the systems available on the market always had a certain flavour to them. Too inflexible. Too much manpower required. Too high costs. And for my husband and his colleague at the time, the most important thing was that essential aspects were often missing, such as quarter-centred reporting.

So if you look at it closely, I developed OSIRIS for my husband. The beginning was still quite naïve. The first prototype was created on our sofa on a rainy Sunday afternoon in April 2022. Back then, it was called *Research Report*, was based on an SQL database and really couldn't do much. There was actually only one important thing: you could enter DOIs and automatically import the data from CrossRef. Of course, you could also save and search activities and format them automatically. But the automatic import was the main point, because that alone had a huge effect. With so little effort, I had created something that made me want more. Due to the degree of automation, it was already falling on fertile ground with my husband.

In just a few weeks, I tinkered with the prototype again and again. It quickly became apparent that SQL wasn't the right thing - far too rigid and inflexible. With so many different activities; publications, posters, lectures, reviews, committee memberships, guests, teaching, etc.; it would have required a large number of tables and it would have been incredibly time-consuming to maintain and edit them. Not to mention the joins that would have been necessary to create a profile page.  MongoDB quickly proved to be the database of choice and, in hindsight, we were absolutely right. Thanks to MongoDB and clever programming (without praising myself), the system has grown enormously in a very short space of time.

Soon we also had to come up with a new name. That was indeed a difficult birth, as they say. I certainly thought about the name for longer than I needed for the first prototype... But in the end, after a lot of trial and error, a decision was made. The system was to be called OSIRIS. Open, Smart & Intuitive Research Information System. And the open source fanatics among you may have already guessed it: the OSI in OSIRIS is of course a reference to the Open Source Initiative. At this point, I was already certain that OSIRIS would become an open source project. I am a very big supporter of the open source community, use a lot of open source software myself, like to look at the source code to understand how things work and use collaborative coding such as the help forums on Github. So naturally OSIRIS had to be open source.

Just to reiterate that: OSIRIS was still a fun project at the time (mid to late 2022), which only slowly but surely became serious. We carried out a short test phase with researchers and the system was well received. Feedback was incorporated and bugs were fixed. OSIRIS became more and more focussed on the needs of researchers, which ultimately led to a high level of acceptance. And then events somehow came thick and fast. At the beginning of 2023, we got the go-ahead from the administrative management. We then presented OSIRIS at a staff meeting in January. The evaluation period starting in 2023 drove us to hurry. Suddenly, our small leisure project was rolled out at the DSMZ and the researchers entered their activities in OSIRIS. The feedback was overwhelming and gave me further impetus for programming. I still only developed the software in my spare time, as my research work was also picking up speed at this time and a role as working group leader was emerging for me.

I remember well how I was suddenly asked if OSIRIS had a website. My husband and his colleague wanted to register OSIRIS as our research information system with the Leibniz Association and needed this information. At the time I said: "Not yet, but I can do it" and put together the first [OSIRIS website] at the weekend. And then we registered OSIRIS with Leibniz. I couldn't have imagined the waves it would make.

In April 2023, exactly one year after my first prototype, I was then asked by the Leibniz Association's CRIS initiative if I would perhaps give a short talk about our CRIS as part of their workshop series. I remember well that the workshop focussed on the use of CRIS in reporting. There was a presentation on Elsevier's proprietary CRIS Pure and on another CRIS that we had developed ourselves, but it was a bit old-fashioned and cumbersome and, according to the person presenting it, no longer met their requirements. And then I introduced OSIRIS. The focus was on reporting, but after that I was only asked questions about OSIRIS itself. I well remember how someone only spoke up to say that they were flashed by what we had just "pulled out of the hat". The feedback was incredible and fuelled the development of OSIRIS even further. Suddenly OSIRIS was more than just a system that I had developed for my husband or my institute.

Over the next few months, I continued to develop OSIRIS with more and more flexibility in mind. For the first time, the focus was on ensuring that other institutes could also use it. The major part of the flexibility, namely that you can freely configure activities, was developed in the two months following this workshop. During the rest of the year, I presented OSIRIS one more time in a lecture on open source at Leibniz and was then also represented at the CRIS Days in Berlin. I have to say that I had a lot of fun and I grew together with OSIRIS in these tasks.

When I look back on the rapid development of events, I can say that yes, I developed OSIRIS for my husband. It was intended to support him in his daily work and take as much work off his hands as possible. But I also developed it for myself. That's why it's very popular with researchers: it was developed by a female scientist and who knows her needs better? I also developed it for the institutes. Especially for the small institutes that don't have the capacity or money to do it themselves or that have the same problems with the existing systems that we had.

But let's be honest: the reason why OSIRIS is so good has nothing to do with why I developed it. Rather, it has something to do with how much fun I had doing it. Building the interface, getting feedback, choosing icons, solving problems as skilfully as possible, coming up with achievements and reinventing the system over and over again, throwing everything overboard and making it a little bit better again and again. And at the end of the day, getting the enthusiasm of the users as feedback. That's what drives me and that's what makes OSIRIS so good. And I'm really looking forward to seeing what else we develop in the future.